Why do we need to care about VanillaJS?
So why?
Why this is important today, this year?
Well, first,
to add one more tool to your toolbox, so
then you don't have just a hammer okay?
So this is important.
So to understand what
your library is doing.
Or if a new version of the library
appears and now they have a new fancy way
to do things, you will understand,
okay, it's better because of.
You will understand why that's better.
Okay, so you will understand your library.
To extend your library with plugins,
add-ons, or
change your library in case you need to.
Because most of the time you need to
get out of the library sometimes.
For example, if you are doing hardware
access, you're using platform API's.
Sometimes you need to get out of
the library for some operations.
And then you need to
come back to the library.
Well, to understand how
to do that properly or
to understand how to code properly that
part of your app that talks to the DOM,
it's better to understand
what you're doing.
Also to be a better web developer.
And this is not just
because I know Vanilla JS.
Okay, so this is something that you
will add to your profile on LinkedIn.
And recruiters are actually taking that in
consideration when they are looking for
web developers.
If you know Vanilla JS, you have
more points in your profile, okay?
Also you can mix these with libraries.
When you're using a library such as Vue or
even React,
you don't need to create your
whole application with React.
React or View can just be like a little
widget within Vanila JS
library when you need it.
It doesn't need to be always
like the whole navigation is
managed by the library, okay?
So you can mix everything.
Also, and probably the most
important part here is that
FrontedMasters.com is Vanilla JS,
and that's why it's so fast.
So if you have seen that it has
a really fast user experience,
it's because it's Vanilla JS, okay?
Maybe we need a plugin for
the browser that will tell you when
you're on a website, this is Vanilla JS.
So you get a vanilla icon or
something to know when you are in a React,
application, a Vue application,
or a vanilla JS application.
And also to use it.
So I don't want you to take what
you will learn today just for
the theory or just for history.
So it's not for historical reasons.
I want you to use it when you can, okay?
And then you can create simple, fast
web apps with no CLI, no build process.
Nothing,even if you want,
you can still use the old FTP,
if you know what I'm talking about.
Because that's something that most new
developers, they don't know what FTP is.
Well, you don't need a PCAP,
you just do an HTML,
a JavaScript file, and
you have an app up and running.
Okay, just a matter of minutes.
Yeah
>> I'll just say that people write into us
constantly on our customer service or
Twitter or whatever,
why is your site so fast?
And yeah, it's because we mostly rely
on just server side rendering and
then with data attributes, adding any kind
of behavior to the side that we need to.
>> Yeah, in fact, some of the libraries,
for example, React,
I'm not sure if you haven't seen this.
Do we have any React developer here?
Let's see, so most of you,
all of you actually.
[LAUGH] So React has changed
its documentation lately.
I think it was a month ago or
less than a month ago.
And now,
they're not suggesting to you to use
React client-side without
an additional framework.
So they're not saying, hey,
yeah, you wanna use React,
just use create React app and
do everything client-side.
That's not the recommendation anymore.
Is it still there?
Yeah, it's one possibility.
But they say, because now we have
a performance issue on the web,
mostly because of the over usage
of client side frameworks.
So things like Next JS or Quick or
other ideas are coming back to,
okay, maybe we need to do
more server side rendering.
Yeah, JavaScript is still useful,
but we don't need to
rely everything on client side and
adding a lot of overhead.
Mostly on the enterprise world,
it's common to hear like, yeah,
we have five megabytes of JavaScript.
It's not so big.
What, five megabytes of
JavaScript is not so big?
So on the enterprise world when
they're doing apps in Angular or
something like that, they feel like five
megabytes of JavaScript is not so big.
And that's a big problem,
okay, in terms of performance.
Not just because of downloading the file,
that's not the biggest problem,
but parsing and executing that file.
And mostly if that's why
is rendering the UI,
because that means that you won't see
anything until that part on executed.
So even this is a discussion today.
This is a tweet from yesterday,
okay, from Ben.
He was saying, genuinely think that every
frontend developer should build their own
framework at some point, and
that's actually Vanilla JS.
Okay, building your own framework for
understanding what you're doing and
why you're doing that, okay?
Because that taught him more
that more JavaScript and
Web APIs in a month, than years of React.
So when you understand VanillaJS,
the DOM APIs,
you understand what you're doing,
how you're doing that, okay?
And Again, that will make you
a better React developer as well,
because you will understand
how React works and
how to do better things in React to
help React use better the DOM APIs.
So main advantages of Vanilla JS,
before actually getting into some code and
start coding our app.
So lightweight, because yeah, you don't
have the overhead of the library.
Today, some libraries
are better than that.
You have tree shaking, so
they can actually get rid of code
that you're actually not using.
So it's getting better.
But anyway, any library or framework
is sitting on top of the DOM API.
So it's always something on top of,
that means you're adding more things.
More control and power.
And you know that with power we
have more responsibilities as well.
And that's one of the disadvantages or
the fears.
from some of you.
That you need to make a lot of decisions
when you're doing Vanilla JS because,
yeah, you're not forced to follow
the guideline from the library.
And yeah,
you need to make a lot of decisions.
Maybe that's life, right.
So at least it's a good idea
to know many options so
then you can make your own decisions.
Simplicity of the code.
Yeah, that might not be the case for
very large solutions.
Flexibility, performance,
we have already been discussing and
talking about performance.
Compatibility is main advantage and say,
I thought that that was a problem,
not really an advantage.
Well, actually when you're
using Vanilla JS, okay,
you don't need to think too
much about compatibility or
dependencies or compatibility
on your server-side framework or
even compatibility with the browser.
We will get there about what we're going
to do today in terms of compatibility.
It may be a joke, but it may be true.
You won't have node modules, okay?
So you won't have thousands of files
in that folder that looks like a mess.
We know it works anyway,
but it's always, okay,
a joke what happens with Node modules.
So main fears of Vanilla JS that
you probably have, okay, and
that's why you're here.
So routing.
That sounds like, but I like routing,
I like how React router works.
Okay, in fact this is coming from
a survey that I did on Twitter.
Okay, I did that a couple of times and
I gathered feedback from developers.
I got, okay, what's the worst thing?
What's your worst nightmare when
we are talking about Vanilla JS?
Well, lack of routing,
that it's too verbose and time-consuming.
That you need to write a lot.
State management.
So how to do state management.
And sometimes we mix fears here.
For example, state management,
some libraries are not giving
you actually state management.
I'm talking about global state management.
They might give you component
based state management.
And they have other libraries
attached that will do the same.
That means that you can still use
Vanilla JS and use Redux, for example.
You don't need React to use Redux.
So if you like Redux,
you can use Redux on Vanilla JS.
Okay, is it Vanilla JS?
Well, we can see, okay?
Again, this is not Boolean, being
Vanilla JS or not, but I'm saying that you
don't always need to use all
the libraries that are like friends.
You can just pick what you need for
that specific project.
Templating.
That's typically one of the biggest
fears when we get here,
like JSX, lack of JSX,
or something similar.
Templates in Angular, where where I
can have ng attributes in the middle
of the HTML, and do something about that.
Complexity.
People think that it gets more complex,
but
I think that that fear has
more to do with ignorance.
Okay, that if you don't know something,
it looks complex.
Not having reusable components.
I'm not making a statement here, this is
just a list of fears from developers.
How to maintain that in
the future looks like a problem.
The learning curve.
It's funny to you see that some people
think that the learning curve of
Vanilla JS is much higher than the
learning curve of Angular, for example.
And I've been playing with both and
I've been teaching on both.
And i think that's exactly the opposite.
The amount of concepts that you
need to understand from Angular,
just for using one example,
it's probably 5x compared with vanilla JS.
Browser compatibility,
that's typically a fear.
But React is helping me solving browser
compatibility issues on the DOM.
I've heard that a lot.
Okay, that if you don't have React or
Angular or Vue, okay,
your app will stop working on some
browsers because some browsers,
I'm talking about modern browsers.
I'm not even talking about Netscape.
People think that maybe maybe your app
will not work in Safari if you're not
using React because there is
like a magic idea going on.
That React is actually
like wrapping the DOM API
with tweaks for Safari or
things like that.
I'm not saying that false or
true yet, but that's the feeling.
And the freedom that we are going
to reinvent the wheel every time.
That's probably one of
the fears that we have.
Okay, and scalability.
We already mentioned that.
I'm not saying that we will solve all
the fears, or we will solve all these
challenges, but at least we will see
what's true by the end of the day.
What's true?
What's actually an over reaction?
What's false, okay, in this list,
>> What level
of experience should I have coming into
this workshop with JavaScript itself?
>> Just to understand the language, so
if you know how to write the class and
you are confident writing Code,
JavaScript code, that would be enough.
And even if, I mean,
if you know TypeScript but
not JavaScript, it's going to be the same.
Things like that.
Anyway, most of the code that
I will write is also ready for
copy and paste, if you want,
in the URL in the GitHub URL.
So even in case you don't
wanna write the whole code,
the code is there if you wanna
follow along or things like that.
Okay, so.
>> We're going to learn the tool and
you'll see when it's the best option.
I already said that a couple of times,
but we want advocate here for
using binaries on every project.
Well, I won't advocate that.
I want you to understand what it is.
You have a working sample,
using different techniques
is going to be little count,
yeah, little chaos there.
But the idea is to show you different
patterns that you can use with this.
And yeah, there will be more to see.
When you have a complex application where
you're managing large amounts of data,
mostly for example, when you have
a large list of things like that,
that will need a special attention.
But we'll start from scratch.
So we're going to see the basics first.